WeTimer
timer for
National Glider.
Based on an ESP8266 WiFi microcontroller board type Wemos D1
mini (34mm x 26mm), the WeTimer timer allows you to control two
servos according to the different flight phases of the glider.
One of the servos is used to control the movements of the stabilizer
with a position during the winching phase, a position during the
flight phase and a final position during dethermalization. The other
servo allows 2 windage positions, one during winching when the
cable is taut (drift in the axis), the other during flight or when the cable is slack. Time
of flight begins following an action on a switch activated by the tension or the release of the cable of
winching. The configuration is done through a web interface accessible via WiFi.
Timer operation:
Power on
timer
The timer turns on in "DT mode":
- servo stabilizer in DT position,
- rudder servo in flight position (steered).
short pulse
on switch hook:
(Time < Arm delay parameter)
Timer in "Army mode":
- servo stabilizer switches to flight position,
- rudder servo remains in flight position.
Start of winching:
(Action on the hook switch
> Arming delay parameter)
"Winch mode" timer:
- servo stabilizer switches to winch position (over-incidence),
- rudder servo switches to winch position (in the axis).
Hook release:
(With timer in "Winch mode")
Flight mode timer:
- servo stabilizer switches to flight position,
- rudder servo switches to flight position.
After "Flight Time"
seconds:
(With timer in "Flight mode")
Returning the timer to "DT mode"
Action on hook switch
before "Flight Time" s.
(With timer in "Flight mode") R
return of timer to "winch mode"
The LED flashes
(frequency 2 seconds)
The LED flashes
(frequency 1/4 seconds)
The LED flashes
(frequency 1 seconds)
The LED is off The hook must be mechanically connected to a normally open switch. It is at
say that the electrical contact must be open if there is no winching cable or if the cable is
relaxed. The electrical contact must close when the cable is energized.
The timer has 4 distinct modes (or 4 states):
• Dethermalised (DT),
• Army,
• Winch.
• Flight.
On power-up, the timer is placed in "dethermalised mode".
In "dethermalized mode", the stabilizer servo is in the DT position and the rudder servo is in
flight position (steered rudder in turn).
A short pulse on the switch of the hook (closure of the electrical contact) switches the
timer in “armed mode”.
When the timer is armed, the stabilizer servo is in the flight position and the rudder servo is
in flight position. The timer can remain in armed mode indefinitely. This mode allows the
preparation of the glider for the flight (installation of the stabilizer for example) or adjustment of the
hand launched glide.
At the start of winching, an action on the switch of the hook for a duration greater than the delay
arming defined in the parameters (see below) switches the timer to “winch mode”.
In this mode, when the cable is taut, the rudder servo switches to the winch position (drift in
axis) and the stabilizer servo also switches to the winch position (this makes it possible to manage an over-incidence of the stabilizer to facilitate climbing in light winds).
If the cable slackens or is released, the timer then switches to "flight mode", and begins the countdown
flight time. In this mode, the stabilizer servo and the rudder servo are in flight position.
In flight mode, 2 events can occur:
• If the cable is taut again before the end of the flight time countdown, the timer
returns to "winch mode" the 2 servos return to the winch position and the time countdown
of flight is reset,
• if no action on the hook switch has occurred before the end of the countdown of the
flight, the timer dethermalizes the model, i.e. The stabilizer servo is put in position
DT and the timer switches to “dethermalised mode”.Timer wiring:
The configuration of the location of the branch points of each element is entirely
configurable within the timer program source code and can be modified for
special needs.
The default configuration of these connections is as follows:
• Power supply by a 1s LiPo battery from 3 to 400 mAh between the 5V point and GND,
• Hook switch: Normally open switch connected between D7 and D8,
• Stabilizer servo signal on pin D2,
• Rudder servo signal on pin D1,
• The power supply for the servos is taken directly from the battery.
Plan :
Servo
stabilizer
switch hook
+ -
1S LiPo
300-400mAh
Servo
derivative
s + - s + -
Connections of the
WeTimer Timer configuration:
When powered, the timer acts as a WiFi access point. This allows
to use any smartphone equipped with a WiFi connection to carry out the entire
configuration. Once connected to the timer opening the internet browser on the phone
is redirected to the settings editing web page,
Activating Wi-Fi and connecting to the timer:
• Swipe the screen from top to bottom,
• Press and hold the Wi-Fi icon ,
• If it is not already done, activate the option Use Wi-Fi,
• Press the network corresponding to the timer.
By default, the timer is seen as a named WiFi access point
WeTimer_NN:NN:NN. The NN:NN:NN part is unique for each
timer. By default, the WiFi network of the timer is not protected by
a password. It is likely that your phone is asking you for a
confirmation to connect to this unsecured network.
Access point name can be changed as well as password protection
password, we will see that later.
Flight time setting:
Once connected to the timer's WiFi network, the phone indicates that the network requires a
authentication. Click on the message that says "Connect to WiFi network" to open the
timer configuration page. In the event that the telephone does not offer you the connection
to the network, open the Internet browser (e.g. Google Chrome) and enter the following address
in the address bar: http://10.10.10.10
You will then get the home page which allows you to configure the timer flight time:
• The buttons and allow you to add or subtract 1 second from the flight time,
• the buttons and allow you to add or subtract 10 seconds from the flight time,
• the buttons and allow you to add or subtract 1 minute from the flight time,
• The button is used to reread the time recorded in the timer in the event of
accidental change,
• the button is used to send the new time to the timer where it will be stored from
permanently,
• the button sends the order to dethermalize immediately to the timer whatever
or its status.Configuration of other parameters:
By clicking on the "Configure the timer" link on the main page, you switch to the
configuration of all timer flight parameters:
• Arming (s): Delay in seconds for the timer to switch from status
"armed" to "Winch" status when the hook switch is activated,
• Flight time (s): Flight time between the release of the switch on the
hook and the DT,
• Flight stabilizer servo (μs): Position of the stabilizer servo during flight or
during winching when the hook switch is released,
• Winch stabilizer servo (μs): Position of the stabilizer servo during the
winching when the hook switch is activated,
• Servo stab DT (μs): Position of the dethermalised servo stabilizer,
• Rudder servo flight (μs): Position of the rudder servo during flight or
during winching when the hook switch is released,
• Winch rudder servo (μs): Position of the rudder servo during the
winching when the hook switch is activated,
The positioning parameters of the servos correspond to the frequency of the signals sent to the
servo. A standard servo typically has a range of motion of 180°. The value of
parameter can vary from 1000 μs to 2000 μs. 1000 μs corresponds to a servo position at 0°,
2000 μs at 180°.
The 2 buttons on the left located under the parameters respectively allow you to read the
configuration stored in the timer or to resend the new parameters after a
change.
The third red button on the right allows to force the status of the timer in DT mode at any time.
moment (RDT). 
The RDT operates from a few tens to a few hundred meters in flight
depending on the quality of propagation of the WiFi waves.
Wi-Fi setup:
By clicking on the "Configure WiFi" link on the main page, you switch to the
Wi-Fi setup:
• AP SSID: Name of the Wifi network as it is seen by the telephone to
connect to the timer. Default: WeTimer_NN:NN:NN, with
unique NN:NN:NN for each timer,
• AP password: WiFi network connection password. empty by
default (no password),
• CLI SSID: Name of the WiFi network to which the timer must connect,
• CLI password: Password of the network to which the
timer.
By default, CLI SSID and password are empty.
The timer has the possibility of connecting to a WiFi network different from the
its own, which allows it to be configured from another computer connected to the
same Wi-Fi network. On the box of your home for example.
The address to enter in your browser to access the timer is
the one indicated at the bottom of the Wifi configuration page:
In this example: http://192.168.1.22
Gauthier Brière – November 2021.